# Paging and sorting

## Paging

When reading the quick start guide, you may have asked yourself why the `readAll` method of the generated client did not just return an array of `TodoItem`s, but an object where the actual `TodoItem` were in a field called `items`.
This is because `readAll` supports paging and also returns paging metadata.
Next to the `items` field, you can also access an object of the following type:

```typescript
interface PageData {
    size: number; // The size of the current page
    totalElements: number; // How many entities there are in total
    totalPages: number; // How many pages you can query (So totalElements / size, rounded up)
    number: number; // The page for which items have been returned, starting at 0
}
```

The corresponding Kotlin data class has the same fields and can be accessed in the same way.
If you inspect the response you get when loading the `TodoItem`s in the quick start guide example, you will notice that by default, a maximum of `20` entities will be retrieved.

If you have more than 20 entities, you can pass an integer as the first parameter.
Take note that this number is an index starting at `0`, so if you wish to retrieve items `21` up to `40`, you have to use `1` as the parameter.
If you do not specify the first parameter or use `undefined`, the default page will be `0`.

You are not restricted to pages of size `0`, but you can use the second parameter to pass the page size.

## Sorting

The third parameter of `readAll` is used for returning entities in a specific order.
A corresponding call may look like this:

```typescript
const comments = await apiClient.commentClient.readAll(undefined, undefined, "createdAt,DESC");
```

In this example, a list of comments is retrieved so that the most recent comment is the first one in the list.
Only the `20` most recent comments are returned, since the default values for `page` and `size` are `0` and `20` respectively.
The `sort` parameter must be string consisting of a property to sort by and a sort direction of either `ASC` (ascending) or `DESC` (descending) separated by a comma.

## Other methods

Paging and sorting is neither restricted to Typescript nor to the `readAll` method.
You can use both when fetching [projections](./projections.md) and [repository searches](./repository_searches.md).
For [custom searches](./custom_searches.md), at least sorting is currently available.
Of course the parameters mentioned here do not only exist in Typescript, but also in Kotlin code generated by FeGen.
